System metrics semantic conventions (#937)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/README.md

# Metrics Semantic Conventions

The following semantic conventions surrounding metrics are defined:

* [HTTP Metrics](http-metrics.md): Semantic conventions and instruments for HTTP metrics.
* [System Metrics](system-metrics.md): Semantic conventions and instruments for standard system metrics.
* [Process Metrics](process-metrics.md): Semantic conventions and instruments for standard process metrics.
* [Runtime Environment Metrics](runtime-environment-metrics.md): Semantic conventions and instruments for runtime environment metrics.

Apart from semantic conventions for metrics and [traces](../../trace/semantic_conventions/README.md),
OpenTelemetry also defines the concept of overarching [Resources](../../resource/sdk.md) with their own
[Resource Semantic Conventions](../../resource/semantic_conventions/README.md).

> ## General Guidelines

Author: This entire section is copy paste from [OTEP 108](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/master/text/metrics/0108-naming-guidelines.md)

| system | ...`. **time** measurements are not necessarily wall time and can be less than
  or greater than the real wall time between measurements.

  **time** instruments are a special case of **usage** metrics, where the
  **limit** can usually be calculated as the sum of **time** over all label
  values. **utilization** can also be calculated and useful, for example
  `system.cpu.utilization`.

- **io** - an instrument that measures bidirectional data flow should be
called `entity.io` and have labels for direction. For example,
`system.network.io`.

- Other instruments that do not fit the above descriptions may be named more
freely. For example, `system.paging.faults` and `system.network.packets`.
Units do not need to be specified in the names since they are included during
instrument creation, but can be added if there is ambiguity.

### Units

Units should follow the [UCUM](http://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum.html) (need
more clarification in
[#705](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/705)).

- Instruments for **utilization** metrics (that measure the fraction out of a total)

> SHOULD use units of `1`.

Reviewer: Let's use the wording used in UCUM:
```suggestion
SHOULD use the default unit `1` (the unity).
```

- **usage** - an instrument that measures an amount used out of a known total
(**limit**) amount should be called `entity.usage`. For example,
`system.memory.usage` with label `state = used | cached | free | ...` for the
amount of memory in a each state. Where appropriate, the sum of **usage**
over all label values SHOULD be equal to the **limit**.

  A measure of the amount of an unlimited resource consumed is differentiated
  from **usage**.

- **utilization** - an instrument that measures the *fraction* of **usage**
out of its **limit** should be called `entity.utilization`. For example,
`system.memory.utilization` for the fraction of memory in use. Utilization
values are in the range `[0, 1]`.

- **time** - an instrument that measures passage of time should be called
`entity.time`. For example, `system.cpu.time` with label `state = idle | user
| system | ...`. **time** measurements are not necessarily wall time and can
be less than or greater than the real wall time between measurements.

  **time** instruments are a special case of **usage** metrics, where the
  **limit** can usually be calculated as the sum of **time** over all label

>   values. **utilization** can also be calculated and useful, for example
>   `system.cpu.utilization`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  values. **utilization** for time instruments can be derived automatically using
  metric event timestamps. For example, `system.cpu.utilization` is defined as the difference
  in `system.cpu.time` measurements divided by the elapsed time.
```
